
# Understanding the role of wheat import dependency on food insecurity: reflections for crisis

## Introduction

Wheat is an integral commodity crop that serves food security purposes worldwide. Any shocks to wheat availability, as was seen in 2022, have tremendous impacts globally, especially for food security for vulnerable countries and groups. In 2019, wheat and its products accounted for 408 kcals per capita per day of food supply in food crisis countries (GNAFC 2022).

Climate change adds uncertainties and exacerbates socioecological vulnerabilities. Industrial and input-intensive agriculture, which promotes uniformity over genetic diversity, contributes to degrading ecological resilience (iPES-Food 2016). Dwindling social protection budgets, rising national debts, and the prioritization of commodity crop cultivation for exports, limit the scope of self-sufficient production of locally relevant diets and build import-dependence to serve food security needs (iPES-Food 2022; Giménez & Altieri 2013), especially in low-income countries.

In 2022, the world food crisis, wheat was a central commodity of concern. This issue was due to varying reasons, but prominently due to supply chain disruptions in the Black Sea region--Russia and Ukraine, who hold a 27% share of the global wheat trade (UNCTAD 2022, 3). In 2020, 34% of Ukraine’s wheat and maize export went to 38 countries who were in food crisis, while Russia exported 73% of its wheat to countries experiencing food crises (GNAFC 2022). In 2021, 36 out of 50 countries with ongoing food crises imported at least 10% of their imports from Russia (Ibid.). Hence, conflict in the Black Sea region had, and continues to have, far reaching impacts on the trade of wheat (Ibid; Global Crisis Response Group on Food, Energy and Finance, 2022). Low-income countries in the Global South were particularly impacted due to their reliance on the region for wheat imports (import dependence) to meet their food security needs. Given a compounding crisis of global inflation, soaring debt, COVID_19 related impacts and climate change risks, countries found themselves in a precarious position (Clapp & Moseley 2020; iPES-Food 2022).
 
Predominantly, there has been a focus on food production as a tenet of food security. However, food security is not just a function of production, but is also a function of availability, adequacy stability and accessibility (cf:Fakhri 2021). The productivist focus on hunger, i.e., the need to produce more to meet growing demands of hunger is a limited approach. Research shows its limitations in addressing key drivers of hunger (De Schutter 2014; iPES-Food 2022; Patel 2009; Sampson2018), which are inequality and conflict that impact availability, adequacy and especially accessibility (Clapp and Moseley 2022; FAO 2022; GNAFC and FSIN 2022; Hopma et al 2014; iPES-Food2022; Sen 1983). Thus, this research focuses on import-dependence to understand the stability tenet of food insecurity that is impacted by supply chain disruptions, as was noted in 2022 and 2008 food crises. This has far-reaching impacts on availability and accessibility of food like wheat, especially during times of shocks or protracted crises.

This paper focuses on the impacts of import dependency ratio (hereafter, IDR) for wheat on moderate to severe food insecurity. Import dependency ratio indicates the dependence of a country on imports to suffice its consumption needs. This ratio reflects the vulnerability of a country to shocks in the global supply chain. The higher the import dependency ratio for wheat, the more likely a country is to be impacted by supply chain disruptions. This response is also true for economic inflation, for example, the higher the difference in currency exchange, the higher the import bill, the more likely is the shock to impact food security in the country. 

While there are contentions around the securitization of hunger by the framing of “food security” especially considering notions of food sovereignty and the right to food (cf: Dalby 1992; De Schutter 2014; Hopma and Woods 2014; Sommerville et al. 2014) for the limited scope of this paper, we use the terminology as it emerges from the data, while acknowledging these contentions. Hence, this paper does not focus on production, instead, it focuses on import dependence.

### Research Objectives 

This study seeks to understand how food security is impacted by import dependency ratio disaggregated for countries in different income groups. To this end, the research design seeks to answer the following questions: 

+ Is there a correlation between import dependence and food security? How does the association change when it is disaggregated against income groups? 

+ How do countries, across varying income groups and IDRs, use their stock? What percentage is used for food purposes (food, seed and industrial) or non-food purposes (feed and residual)? 

The study hypothesizes the positive correlation between IDR and food insecurity, especially for lower income countries. Higher income countries or major producers of wheat may not have high correlations in this regard. We also hypothesize a higher percentage of wheat is consumed for food use in countries with higher import dependencies, as opposed to those with lower import dependencies. 

The research underlines the importance of improving self-sufficiency through reducing import-dependence, among others, to build greater resilience against compounding crises and shocks. This study seeks to improve priorities in policy interventions to better account for import dependencies in reducing resilience against increasing propensity of crises. The dynamics emerging from the associations seek to add to the growing literature and calls of action to build equitable and transformational systemic shifts in our food and economic systems to better stand against crises. The paper, finally, seeks to offer additional caution against myopic responses to crises that lock us further into trade and production dependencies that disfavor self-sufficiency and exacerbate inequities. Instead, the momentum could be used for transformational and socioecologically inclusive change, while addressing immediate needs.
